---
layout: post
title: Protocol Buffers and Go
date: 2014-12-26 16:13:11
---

# Overview

This post explains explains how to use protocol buffers in go from installing
protocol buffer to actually using one.

# Install Protocol Buffer

First of all, protocol buffer compiler `protoc` need to be installed.

{% highlight sh %}
$ sudo apt-get install protobuf-compiler
{% endhighlight %}

# Install Protocol Buffer Go Plugin

After installing protocol buffer compiler `protoc`, we need to install protocol
buffer go plugin to generate go source files and a library for runtime support.

[The official README](https://github.com/golang/protobuf/blob/master/README)

> This software has two parts: a 'protocol compiler plugin' that
> generates Go source files that, once compiled, can access and manage
> protocol buffers; and a library that implements run-time support for
> encoding (marshaling), decoding (unmarshaling), and accessing protocol
> buffers.

{% highlight sh %}
$ go get -u github.com/golang/protobuf/protoc-gen-go
$ go get -u github.com/golang/protobuf/proto
{% endhighlight %}

# Use Protocol Buffer

Now we are ready to start using protocol buffer. Define a protocol buffer
message and save it as `person.proto`

{% highlight text %}
package main;

message Person {
  required string name = 1;
  required int32 age = 2;

  enum Gender {
    Male = 0;
    Female = 1;
  }

  optional Gender gender = 3 [default = Male];
}
{% endhighlight %}

Side note: The official doc warns that `required` keyword must be treaded
carefully.

[Protocol Buffers Language Guide](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto)

> Required Is Forever You should be very careful about marking fields as
> required. If at some point you wish to stop writing or sending a required
> field, it will be problematic to change the field to an optional field – old
> readers will consider messages without this field to be incomplete and may
> reject or drop them unintentionally. You should consider writing
> application-specific custom validation routines for your buffers instead.
> Some engineers at Google have come to the conclusion that using required does
> more harm than good; they prefer to use only optional and repeated. However,
> this view is not universal.

Next generate go source files from `person.proto`. You should see a generated
file named `person.pb.go`.

{% highlight sh %}
$ protoc --go_out=. *.proto
{% endhighlight %}

Finally try marshalling and unmarshalling the person message in `main.go`.

{% highlight go %}
package main

import (
	"log"

	"github.com/golang/protobuf/proto"
)

func main() {
	p1 := &Person{
		Name: proto.String("Ken"),
		Age:  proto.Int32(27),
	}
	// (1)
	log.Println(p1.Gender)
	log.Println(p1.GetGender())

	m, err := proto.Marshal(p1)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("error marshalling person: %v", err)
	}

	p2 := &Person{}
	err = proto.Unmarshal(m, p2)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("error unmarshalling person: %v", err)
	}

	// (2)
	log.Println(p1)
	log.Println(p2)
}
{% endhighlight %}

In (1) you can see that `p1.Gender` returns `nil` (because it is raw property
of person object) but `p1.GetGender()` returns default value Male which is
because `GetGender()` is a getter method generated by protocol buffer. In (2)
you can see that p1 and p2 have the same value.

Thanks for reading, happy hacking!

# References

- [Protocol Buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/)
- [golang/protobuf](https://github.com/golang/protobuf)
